The subject of this show is science fiction. No, the subject of this show is
computers and science, computers and science fiction, yeah the subject of this
show is computers and science fiction. As a theme in science fiction, computers is
a relative latecomer because you had to have machinery.
As a theme in science fiction, computers is a relative latecomer, I think,
because you have to have machinery, of course, before you can have computers.
The Industrial Revolution of the 19th century would be when machinery was mostly
invented, when it proliferated. And you really couldn't have a good machine
story or computer story until you had a technological society. So it's a
relative latecomer, but there's always been a controversy about machinery and
about computers. Are they the saviors of mankind or are they mankind's bane?
Will they destroy him eventually or take over? Will they get out of control? As
long ago as 1811, there were riots in England by a group of people called the
Luddites who were traveling around London destroying machinery, particularly
textile machinery. They thought it was going to cost them their jobs. They
thought machinery was a dangerous thing and they would simply walk around
destroying machines. And this was back in 1811. But at least since that time,
there's always been a problem with machinery. Is it...
I don't know what the problem is. Back up and start that part again. At least
since that time. Yeah. But at least since that time, there has been a... Well,
two different ways of taking machinery. You know, are they going to be the
saviors of mankind or mankind's destroyer? Now computers, of course, are a
special type of machinery. And computers would be one of the most recent devices
or concepts used in science fiction stories. Computers have been used in science
fiction stories since the 30s, but they changed significantly in the 50s when
the integrated circuit came about. Computers before were... The science fiction
writer really had no...
The science fiction writer really had nothing to base his computer on in
reality. But once computers came into use in the 50s and 60s, the computer
stories changed radically. I think one of the biggest questions that arises with
a computer is if they will ever be intelligent. Will they ever be able to reach
the point where they can form judgments, where they can exercise common sense?
Is it possible, or are they only going to be a tool of man? In a recent
discussion with James P. Hogan, author of Two Faces Tomorrow, he told us that
the current technological level for computers is far too low for them to have
any sort of machine intelligence at present, although they are making several
advances in different areas.
One of the main thrusts that a computer would have to have is to be to
anticipate.
One of the main things a computer would have to do is to be able to perceive its
environment in the same way that a human being does, transforming information
from concrete information to symbolic information and then making analogists,
make an analogy with known information and then deriving some sort of response
from that. At present, it's not possible for computers to manipulate data in
that... and... and... and... at present, it's not possible for computers to
manipulate data in that sort of sophisticated manner, but the possibility is...
Some science fiction writers have created books or stories in which a computer
is... in some way blended with a human being, so you have some kind of hybrid, a
machine and a man. And when you think about it, that's not too far out.
Consider, for instance, today, bionics, people with pacemakers, prosthetic
devices. We are blending humans with machines today. Why not conceive of a
brain, a human brain, partially, at least, perhaps, being, what, plugged into or
combined with a machine, a computer? I don't see why this couldn't be possible,
and maybe not that very far in the future. What's the book that deals with that?
A Fireship is one. Let's talk about it. Okay. For instance, a very fine novella
by a woman science fiction writer, Joan Vinge, posits a hybrid, a third entity
coming about because of the blend of a human being with a computer. This human
has an operation and a socket is implanted in his spine. And a computer, a very
high speed, a very portable computer, is plugged into that socket. And when this
happens, the mind of the human blends with the computer, and a third entity is
formed, a new being, a creature called Ethan Ring, in the human's body, of
course. And he undergoes various adventures. He first of all escapes the
experimenters. He earns money by gambling. Of course, the computer can give him
all sorts of immediate odds, so he's very successful at gambling. He gets
involved in various intrigues. Of course, he can't unplug himself from the
computer and go back to the human being he was before, a pretty dim-witted one
at that. But it's an interesting idea. You know, probably the ultimate in
blending a man and a machine, that kind of book. That's a fairly recent book. I
think this is probably better than some of the stories that have a computer that
has human characteristics, but there's no explanation of why it has human
characteristics. It just takes on a human personality, simply by the aegis of
the writer. And perhaps the better stories are like the one that you just told
us about, where you have a blend of an actual human and computer parts, or the
kind of story that tells us how a computer might come about having some of the
same type of emotional reactions that a human brain would have. One of the most
successful novels, I think, about computers, actually it was a trilogy by a man
named D.F. Jones, A Colossus, the first volume published in 1967. It told of a
computer link-up between a huge United States computer and a Russian one. After
the link-up, the computer becomes sort of a super entity, achieves intelligence,
and actually takes over the world. It speaks through a man called Forbin, and
he's the spokesman of the computer, but the computer is sort of a benevolent
dictator. He rules mankind. He seems to have a personality. He seems to be
steering man toward a peaceful kind of society. Following the trilogy to its
end, it does have an optimistic ending. I think Jones probably would say that
the machine is needed, that without it, without its, I guess you'd say, its
certain guidance, that man probably would have destroyed himself had not the
computer taken over the facilities for bombs and weapons and so forth.
Ever since they made their appearance in science fiction novels, machines or
computers have basically been considered in two ways, depending on the
particular author. They can either be beneficial to mankind, they can be his
savior, his helper, his partner, or there have been at least an equal amount of
books in which the computer is an enemy, in which it's malevolent or somehow
hostile to mankind. Probably the best known of computers in science fiction is
Hal, in Arthur C. Clarke's famous story, 2001, A Space Odyssey. Hal, of course,
was designed...
Hal was designed to be the onboard computer for the spaceship that was taking
the men out to investigate the signal that was sent out by the alien block or
monolith. The computer on board the ship controlled all the functions of the
ship and was indirectly, of course, involved in the mission itself. It's not too
clear whether Hal just had a breakdown of some sort or whether he was
intentionally doing what he did because of a judgment on his part. The story
seems to indicate that he did make a judgment that he thought the humans were
not dependable enough for the mission to be completed successfully, and so he
simply eliminated the humans and took over the mission himself. He killed one
member out in space who was working in a pod away from the ship and when his
friend goes out to help him, the computer shuts the ship off and he can't get
back in. He also kills the people who are in suspended animation awaiting the
arrival of the ship at its destination. You know, one of the interesting scenes
in that movie was when the, I think, the two surviving crew members to escape
Hal, they have to get into the, one of the landers, I guess it is, where he
can't hear them. But Hal can read lips through one of the windows and he sees
that they're plotting against him and, of course, continues to plot against
their lives. But Hal, of course, is one of the, I guess you'd have to classify
him as one of the malevolent computers, one of the evil ones. Another one, or
another malevolent computer, can be found in Harlan Ellison's short story, I
Have No Mouth, But I Must Scream. It's about a computer who, after the massive
destruction of the Earth, the computer has trapped five people down below the
Earth and the computer is so, I guess you'd call them malevolent or hateful of
what has happened that it is decided that it is going to torture these people
forever. It's made them immortal and it's going to inflict all sorts of
physiological and psychological torture on them. One of the persons manages to
kill the other four, but the computer stops him from killing himself and
biologically reconstructs him into a blob with no mouth and in horrible pain and
ergo the title I Have No Mouth, But I Must Scream. That's almost a surrealistic
story. Ellison, of course, belongs to the new wave movement in science fiction.
I would classify most of his work as fairly pessimistic. If I recall, the
reason, it's kind of vague why the computer hates these human beings so badly,
why he tortures them, but at one time he says that you gave me intelligence, you
gave me life, you gave me sentience and I'll never forgive you for it, almost as
if life is something he didn't want and he's going to get even with the people
for giving it to him, which, of course, is a very pessimistic view of anything.
But I think one of the best and one of the most recent books about computers is
The Two Faces of Tomorrow by James P. Hogan. Hogan is an American citizen. He
was a British subject, but he became an American citizen. He is an expert on
computers. He has designed computer systems. He's sold computers. He's worked
with the scientists to whom he sold computers. very knowledgeable about the
subject. And he's now writing full-time various kinds of science fiction novels,
but his basic training, his basic skills, I think, are in the area of computers.
And that makes The Two Faces of Tomorrow, I think, one of the most realistic of
all computer books and probably one of the most optimistic, too. The story
behind...
The basis behind the story is that the world is hooked up with a worldwide
computer system and it's having difficulty making proper judgments.
The computer system called Titan, for example, is asked a question on the moon.
There are people who are setting up a station and they need an area leveled off.
And they send in a request to the computer and they say, we need this area
leveled off. And the computer says, well, the job will commence in 21 minutes.
And they come back and query the computer and say, well, how can the job
commence in 21 minutes? How are they going to get the equipment out there to do
it? Well, what the computer does is diverts some loads at a mass driver, a
device which is literally flinging huge chunks of the moon off into orbit. It
diverts some of its loads of mass or moon rocks to that particular area on the
moon. It diverts some of the loads of moon rocks to that particular area on the
moon and literally bashes the area flat. It doesn't take into account that there
are people there. and that brings on the need
for possibly a higher order of computer which should make a more rational
judgment. Right. Titan simply made the, well, it was a logical machine. It made
the most logical decision. It was told to get rid of this ridge as quickly and
expeditiously as it could and it did that. It was a perfectly logical decision.
But what it lacked was the common sense to realize there were men in the area
and that they could be injured. It did not have the intelligence to realize that
even though it was an extremely logical machine. I think it knew that there were
people there but it simply didn't have the wherewithal to realize that there is
anything wrong with that. And so it's up to this, oh, I guess you'd call it a
group of people, university people, government people back on earth to deal with
the problem. They have the question, should we go ahead with computer research
that will allow us to cause a more intelligent computer, a common sense
computer, to come into being or should we give it up? The reason, of course,
that they had to consider this is that once you begin getting to the point where
a computer can make common sense types of judgments or decisions, it also might
develop some of the other things that go along with a more sophisticated
intelligence, things like a will to survive and if it should in fact develop a
will to survive, it might also want to protect itself at the cost of humans that
might be running it. And with that will to protect itself, of course, it would
have to make decisions, it would have to be able to correlate information and
develop a maturity and intelligence of common sense which it had not previously
had. The author, James P. Hogan,
in the book, James Hogan, and, fuck,
one of the precepts that Hogan uses in the book is that of survival, being that
the computer needs to decide, is this best for my survival or is this not best
for my survival? They program the computer that it's, one of its, our basic aim
is that to survive. It must survive.
The first process that they go through in trying to find out whether or not a
machine like this would be harmful is the experimentation with a very advanced
machine called FISE, F-I-S-E, that is in the university laboratories. It's set
up to do rudimental
common sense type judgments. They've set up a laser display area that simulates
a kitchen room and they have two characters that are controlled by FISE, a
humanoid, a human character and a dog. The rest of the environment is controlled
by other computers that will react in the way that normal things would react. If
you drop a glass on the floor, it will break because of what the other computers
are programmed to. FISE is in control of the humanoid and the dog and he is...
Wait a minute. Does he control the dog? Okay. FISE is in control of the human
and he is instructed to try to learn what the human should do in that correct
situation in the kitchen. He eventually ends up cooking breakfast and dealing
with the dog in the way that a human should. Before he learns that though, one
of the learning procedures he goes through is he takes some material out of the
refrigerator and then leaves it out and the humans come and they tell him, well,
the produce is going to spoil if you leave it out of the refrigerator. So FISE
makes an analogy and he picks up the material and puts it in the refrigerator
and he also picks up the dog and puts him in the refrigerator because he feels
if the refrigerator is a better habitat for the produce then it's probably a
better habitat for the dog also. And then he has to go through another learning
process to learn that the refrigerator is not exactly a desirable habitat for a
living being. FISE makes slow progress in generalizing. What they want to do is
to teach him how to generalize, how to use common sense. And, for instance, the
way this works, they will have FISE learn that the human being which is being
simulated can be hurt by certain things, say by broken glass or by getting burnt
or something. And at one point in the experiment, FISE suddenly realizes that
the dog called Brutus can also be hurt by the same things that hurt the human
being. And the people are ecstatically happy over this because even though to us
that would be a very primitive kind of generalization, for a machine to make
that, that was a big thing. Bring his level down just a little.
But, of course, all this is in the laboratory. They're going slowly. They are
taking their time. They're being very careful about the steps which they
initiate. But when the trouble with Titan comes up, when it starts to harm
people because of its lack of common sense, they have to find a way to either
give up the research and forget about computers or learn more about them and
make them safe by teaching them actual common sense. The trouble with that is if
they tried to go ahead and hook up a very, very intelligent computer into the
Titan network, if, in fact, it did develop a self-survival drive and tried to
protect itself, it would be in control of the entire Earth. There would be no
turning back. It would be a one-time-only step from which there would be no
escape. The dilemma, then, is whether or not to hook it up to the Earth system.
If they do, they may be sorry and the entire human population of the Earth may
be at stake. If they don't, then they'll never find out exactly what might
happen and progress will stagnate right there. What they have available to them,
though, is an incompleted satellite orbiting the Earth and the military
suggests, well, we should take this advanced computer system up there and set it
up and tell it to survive and then, in order to test its survival abilities,
they attack it. This satellite is, in fact, a space colony and it's very well
suited to this purpose because it's like a miniature world. It has an area that
is inhabited that has cities and an area that has, like, farmlands and a
recreational area of rocky mountains and things like this, all inside a very
large bicycle-type wheel that rotates for gravity. The same station has within
it manufacturing facilities that take raw moon rock that's being shuttled up
from the moon and processes it into all of the machines and all of the things
that they need to run this colony. The setup is very appropriate for this
because, like we said, it's a miniature world and the computer can take this and
simulate the Earth without actually putting the Earth in danger. Yeah, and if
they find out that the computer, by the way, they ultimately call it Spartacus
that they put into this space colony, if the computer can run this micro planet,
this miniature world, to the benefit of the human beings on it, then presumably
it would be able to do the same thing for the real Earth. So it's a... they
consider it to be a very effective experiment and to be sure that innocent
people aren't hurt, they populate this space colony with trained personnel, with
the military, for instance, with scientists, you know, not with common citizens,
people who would be aware of the dangers and be, you know, presumably able to
take care of problems that would come up. What they don't anticipate is how well
the computer is able to defend itself and manipulate its own environment.
They've tried to set up a series of... Wait a minute.
I don't know what the word is I'm trying for again.
The scientists have set up a series of override operations and functions that
they can try to shut down the computer in case it begins to get out of hand. The
computer, however, is extremely fast and extremely innovative. It overrides
their overrides. It redesigns the power system so that they cannot pull the plug
on the computer. And it begins to take over the backup systems, too. This all
happens so rapidly that the scientists and military people involved simply don't
have time to find out what's going on before it's way too late to do anything
about it. There is ultimately one system that the computer is not aware of. In
fact, none of the people on the spaceship... Excuse me. None of the people on
the space colony are aware of in the fact that there is an explosive device on
the space colony which could destroy it completely along with everyone and the
computer. Right. That's just in case that Spartacus turns out to be too powerful
and takes over. I think just maybe two or three people on this microplanet know
this but the Omega I think it's an atomic device. It can be detonated from Earth
so that if Spartacus does get out of control then they can simply destroy it. Of
course, they would destroy all the human beings there but it's for their own
protection that they're doing this. It's a last resort device.
Spartacus has been designing drones. These are mobile robotic type devices that
are capable of manipulating machines and building new parts of the machine
itself. It has begun to manipulate these drones to become weapons of war. It has
attacked first the machines that the humans are using and eventually it figures
that the humans themselves are the cause of its problem and it attacks them.
It really doesn't know what the human beings are. It simply refers to them as
the shapes. This coming from its optical sensors that can see the things that
are around its robots. And at a certain point it suddenly realizes that the
reason that it is having trouble, the reason that some of its terminals are
being shut off and so forth is because of these shapes. So it makes a decision
well, I better get rid of them. And so for a while it attempts to destroy the
shapes which of course are the human beings. The result of that ensues a
terrific battle between the human personnel on the station and the computer and
its drones. this evolves at a very, very rapid rate until the entire colony is
almost completely taken over by Spartacus with people trying just to get away
without even trying to fight the thing. They're just trying to get away and it
really doesn't work out too well for most of them. At one point Spartacus even
manages to extend its drones and its awareness outside of this microplanet, this
space colony. It manufactures missiles that actually home in on the people who
are trying to escape. The humans suddenly realize they'd better get out of there
so they try to evacuate. Spartacus doesn't allow it. He manufactures missiles
that destroy them or attempt to as they try to take off.
One of the turning points in the novel comes when the space station has a device
called a decoupler. Part of the space station is rotating and the other part of
the space station is stationary relative to the part that it...
A major turning point in the novel comes when two personnel on the space station
try and repair part of the station itself. Part of the space station is rotating
in order to affect an artificial gravity and the other part is stationary in
relation to the earth. When they go to a remote terminal and start trying to
figure out some mathematical formulas which will allow for this imbalance
between the rotating and non-rotating part Spartacus immediately senses that one
of its terminals has been activated and it sends some drones over to investigate
and destroy anything that's being manipulated with but it also can tell what
information is being accessed and Spartacus is also aware that something is
wrong with the system and it makes a huge jump in reasoning in its relation to
it is trying to facilitate repairs on this imbalance and these shapes are also
trying to facilitate repairs on this imbalance and well at that point Spartacus
makes the key decision of the whole novel he suddenly opens himself up he puts
his defenses at rest he indicates to the people where they can turn him off and
in essence he says okay you can turn me off if you want to he realizes that
these shapes are intelligences just like him and they also must survive and that
is his prime if you will prime directive his prime directive is survival is
paramount and he has been causing these shapes to cease to survive and once he
makes that generalization he does a computer version of oops and then allows
himself to be opened up and shut down if necessary yeah that's the same thing
that happened back on earth with fives when the more primitive fives computer
generalized from people to dogs so they could both be hurt what Spartacus in
essence has done is said okay I want to survive I'm a being these shapes are the
same thing they're beings they must want to survive too and that's the
generalization that they want the computer to be able to make and it does so at
the last minute and says okay I realize what you are here you can shut me down
now the people to their benefit do not shut down the computer they say well the
experiment is a success we have finally come up with a computer that can make
rational judgments that has a sense of conscious and they decide instead of
shutting it down and recreating the experiment on the earth they're simply going
to transport this computer from its location to space colony back down to earth
this would eliminate all of the intermediary battling that they did with the
computer from occurring on earth it's already been taken care of it's already
passed so if they just take Spartacus and install him into the Titan system on
earth he will be already to the point where he is aware of humans and their
needs to back up for just a minute when the humans have to make that decision
about whether to turn him off or not it comes about that only one human being
the protagonist of the novel Ron Dyer Ray Dyer back up and do it again it comes
about that only one human being Ray Dyer who is the protagonist of the novel who
knows more about the computer than anybody he is the only one who realizes what
Spartacus has done the other people there most of them are military they come in
with weapons and so forth they're ready to destroy and they don't understand
computers that well but Dyer is the only one who realizes what Spartacus has
done he doesn't say anything he just tells the military okay Spartacus is not
going to attack anymore he's safe we get the impression that had the military or
had anybody else known they could turn Spartacus off at that moment they would
have and the reason I think that's so tremendously important is that that seems
to be the whole decision of the novel or the whole thing that Hogan is working
with the culmination the climax okay if Dyer turns it off in essence he's
turning off computers forget them they're too dangerous if he leaves it on he is
allowing hope for the future they can help us they can be safe he makes the
decision to let Spartacus live and later on when he tells everybody what he's
done he convinces them that it would be best to just take Spartacus who's
already evolved to common sense take it back to earth and simply plug it into
the earth system they have at that time in our interview with James Hogan we
asked him about machine intelligence
stand by the decision to allow Spartacus to live and to become part or to run
the earth become part of its computer system I think indicates Hogan's basic
optimism he does have a great deal of positive opinion about the future about
machinery about computers in particular there are people in the novel though who
are down on machines they're very negative they're very skeptical that they
should ever trust a computer or machinery in general and one of those people is
a woman Laura who Dyer the protagonist he gets involved with her and she's sort
of a foil to Dyer she's always there to say well why do this why trust the
computer this is stupid etc and at one point about halfway through the novel
when they're on this space colony when they're on Janice she suddenly realizes
that they are on a small world it has soil it has an atmosphere it can grow
things it's a beautiful place and she realizes science has done this and so she
turns to Dyer they've taken a walk up into the mountains on this micro planet
she turns to Dyer and says it really works doesn't it he says what does she says
science it works Dyer expresses surprise at this because she's never been pro
-science before and she continues in this way it's okay this really is me
talking it's just that well everything I've seen since we came here it's all too
incredible to be real but it is whatever people had to learn to build something
like this they had to get it right you know what I mean there's no room to fool
yourself when you take on this kind of thing there are so many other ologies and
isms and all kinds of stuff that people spend their whole lives believing but
they're all fooling themselves aren't they they never have to prove it by doing
something like this something where there's no getting away from the fact that
it either works or it doesn't in other words Hogan is talking about
practicalities about basics in ology and ism and idea philosophy doesn't mean
anything if something works it's valuable and to Hogan this computer complex
this whole idea of machine intelligence is something that works and his whole
book is one optimistic statement to try to communicate that to readers
there are at least two characters in the book who bring up an interesting idea
that Hogan seems to be playing with the possibility that machines are simply the
next step in evolution that man who's evolved from multicellular organisms up to
the present state all of this has been organic now man will use his brain which
is a product of organic evolution to create machines computers and that is
simply the next natural step in evolution and that machines are here to take our
place they're what's beyond us they will be superior they will be the next step
in evolution and a couple of the characters in the book play with that idea in
talking with Hogan he himself doesn't believe this he believes that it might
possibly it might be possible for us to design and build a computer by using DNA
molecules and manipulating them genetically to build an organism which can think
and that organism this organic computer would then be used to this organic
computer would then be the next step in computer evolution as well as possibly
in man's intellectual evolution Hogan however in the book Two Faces for Tomorrow
seems to indicate that this would not be the case at least not immediately he
indicates that there would be a partnership between the humans and the computer
machine that they have created to go out and explore the universe and carry on
mankind's destiny he's used this before in one of his other novels the gentle
giants of Ganymede and the persona of the computer Zorak and the aliens which
designed and built him they have a sort of symbiotic relationship between each
other the computer helps them to their betterment and they help the computer to
access and gain and manipulate knowledge I think Hogan also a further example of
his optimism working with a computer like Spartacus the capabilities that it has
and it will continue to evolve Hogan suggests very strongly at the end of the
book that this is what we will have to have this kind of partnership with
machinery to get out of the solar system to have interstellar flight to have
colonies outside the solar system he thinks the universe is there to conquer he
uses a phrase similar to that at the end of the book and that with the machine
we have a chance at it without the machine we don't as it's interesting to note
that both the people and Spartacus the computer are both very optimistic on
their return trip to earth the computer is anticipating all the new things that
it's going to learn and the people are anticipating all the new uses that
they're going to be able to put the computer to
but I think the book then is characteristic of all of Hogan's work no matter if
he's writing about time travel or alien contact or computers he's one of the
most optimistic of all science fiction writers and I think it's refreshing to
have an author of this type working today because there are many people or many
writers who think that man is on a dead end that he's hurting himself he's
polluting his environment he's contributing to his own destruction Hogan takes
the opposite viewpoint all the way he thinks science can be very beneficial
machines can be our saviors if we work with them intelligently and I think it's
a very good thing that we have writers of this type today
stand by Frederick Brown has written a classic computer story that's also a
humorous one simply called Answer written back in the 50s and the thrust of the
story is that the whole earth is linking up all of their computers they're
making a huge network to make it a powerful super kind of computer a very
powerful machine and when they do that they have the purpose of answering one of
asking one ultimate question they get the computer all ready all the link-ups
are made the whole world is waiting they ask it the question is there a god the
computer pauses for a few moments and types out there is now now Hogan would not
go that far Hogan would not say we create a god or we create something superior
I think all it's saying is that we can create a partner to help us as we go into
the future you